feat: :sparkles: add posts about why GitHub and Quarto (#121)
steno-aarhus/research: about/github.md

---
title: "GitHub"
date: "2025-05-18"
# date-modified: ""
---

This document describes more of the reasons why we decided to and
recommend using GitHub for research and communication purposes.

## Needs

Increasingly, researchers around the world are using Git to work
collaboratively together and using GitHub to share those Git projects.
Tools like RStudio for R or Jupyter for Python have built-in support for
Git and excellent integration with GitHub. Many courses for PhD students
also include GitHub, or reference GitHub in some way, so increasingly,
they are being exposed to and using GitHub in their own work.

Our needs at Steno Diabetes Center Aarhus are to have a platform where
we can share internal procedures, guidelines, host project websites, and

> put work that we collaboratively work on. Preferably, we want a tool

Reviewer: ```suggestion
put documents that we collaboratively work on. Preferably, we want a tool
```

Reviewer: There is something with this entire sentence that doesn't scan with me, but that may just be me.

that researchers are already using or will likely use in the near
future, and we want a tool that is already integrated into how we work.
We would rather not have to teach and learn a tool that is only used in
one area (e.g. only to host websites or keep documents), but rather use
a tool that is already part of a researcher's toolbox.

> Because of these reasons and needs, GitHub is the best and optimal tool

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because of this, GitHub is the best and optimal tool
```

to use. We already currently use GitHub at Steno Diabetes Center Aarhus
for a wide variety of purposes, that range from working on research
projects like the [UK Biobank](https://steno-aarhus.github.io/ukbAid/),
developing tools like the [Open Source Diabetes

> Classifier](https://steno-aarhus.github.io/osdc/), or hosting websites

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Classifier](https://steno-aarhus.github.io/osdc/), to hosting websites
```

for projects like [ON-LiMiT](https://steno-aarhus.github.io/on-limit/).

## So what is Git and GitHub?

This could be a full document on its own. But to keep it short,
[Git](https://git-scm.com/) is a version control system that allows you

> to track changes to your files and store them in a history called a

Reviewer: Don't think many of the readers will know what a history is in this context.

> to track changes to your files and store them in a history called a

Author: ```suggestion
to track changes to your files and store them in a "history of changes" called a
```

repository. It is a powerful tool to use on your own, but especially
when working with others. It allows you to work on the same files
together, and keep track of who made what changes and when. It is a tool
used by millions of people around the world, especially in the software
development community. Software like RStudio and Jupyter or services
like Netflix or Airbnb are all developed with Git, while companies like
Microsoft or Apple or governments like the UK government use Git to
develop their software. But you can use Git for more than just software,
you use it to trach changes to *any type of* file on your computer.

[GitHub](https://github.com) is a web-based platform for hosting/storing
Git repositories. It adds extra features like issue tracking, pull
requests for collaboration, project management, and the ability to host
files for a website. GitHub is the most popular Git hosting platform, is

> it owned by Microsoft, and is used by millions of people around the

Reviewer: do we need to add something (in a note) about the issues surrounding Microsoft being a US company?

Author: At least the Region and AU are very tightly tied to Microsoft (e.g. 365, Sharepoint, Word, etc). This is not something to note here.

world every day. It hosts software used in all areas of life, from
healthcare to finance to security to the functioning of the internet
itself.

## GitHub fits our needs

GitHub is not just a tool to host Git repositories, it also has a
massive community of open science enthusiasts, researchers, and
developers. Aside from this, it:

-   It is free to use for both private repositories (with limited
    features) and public ones (with nearly all features).
-   It is incredibly reliable and stable because it is depended on by so

>     many people and organizations.

Author: Not completely, but there is enormous pressure and expectation that is it. Which has the effect of making it reliable and stable. It's a feedback loop :yum:

-   It is very secure and has dedicated teams working to protect it from
    attacks. Individual Git repositories can be secured even further

>     with multiple other settings.

Author: Yea, but I'm not going into the exact details of that here. That's too technical for an about page.

-   It has a very friendly interface, including with many accessibility
    features such as for colour-blindness.
-   Many researchers, especially new researchers, are already using Git
    and Github. Or they will very likely be using it in the near future
    because of the increasing popularity of Git and GitHub in the
    research community.
-   Git and GitHub are tools that empower participation and
    collaboration, because of the way it is designed. Anyone can
    contribute to a public repository through features called pull
    requests, which means that if someone sees a typo or mistake in a
    webpage or in analysis code, they can easily and directly make a fix
    and suggest it to be added.

## Security

Security is a major concern for most organizations, especially nowadays.
This concern is not just for academic institutions, but also for
companies and governments. Since so many organizations around the world

> depend on GitHub, security is a big priority for GitHub. Because so many

Reviewer: ```suggestion
depend on GitHub, security is a big priority for them. Because so many
```

people depend on it, GitHub experiences regular and repeated attacks.

> Even still, it almost never goes done, and when it does, it is usually

Author: ```suggestion
Even still, it almost never goes down, and when it does, it is usually
```

for an hour or two. That's because of the dedicated teams of people at
GitHub working to defend against these attacks.

And, if something does happen to GitHub, because of the way Git works it

> is very easy to move your content to another Git hosting platform.

Author: There's at least one person who has a local copy, just by the nature of using Git as it is designed for. E.g. me or you.

Some security practices we use for the Steno Aarhus GitHub organization:

-   We follow the principle of least privilege. By default, all members
    can only read other repositories unless they are assigned to a team
    that has write access to a repository or are added directly to a
    repository.
-   All main "branches" in our repositories are protected and can't be
    deleted by anyone aside from the organization owners (in case of an
    emergency). Only a few people are given owner status to the
    organization.

What GitHub, the administrators of the Steno Aarhus GitHub, or anyone
cannot protect against is social engineering attacks like phishing or
other attacks that target the user. Users are generally the weakest link
in the security chain. We can't control that aside from limit access and
educate users. This security problem is not unique to GitHub, but for

> any software or service used.

Author: This is to highlight that no system is truly safe. I've heard arguments about "oh but if a user's account is hacked, that's a big problem for GitHub".. but that's for all systems.

## Hosting websites

One of the biggest reasons we at Steno Aarhus use GitHub is to host
websites. GitHub has a service called [GitHub
Pages](https://pages.github.com/) that allows you to host a website for
free.

What does "host" and "website" mean? Websites are simply a collection of
plain HTML files that are linked together and that have styling
instructions from files called [CSS](https://www.w3schools.com/css/)
files. If you open these files in a browser like Firefox or Chrome, it
will be displayed as you are used to seeing websites being displayed.
But if you open those same files in a text editor, you will see HTML
code and text. That's because browsers take the HTML text and visually
render it into the nice form we see.

To host a website means to put those HTML and CSS files on a server in a

> way that anyone in the world can access if they give the correct URL
> address. That's it. Hosting is simply copying the files to the server

Reviewer: ```suggestion
way that a browser anywhere in the world can read if given the correct URL
address. That's it. Hosting is simply copying the files to the server
```

that connects to the internet.

In the case of GitHub Pages, you are giving GitHub a set of static (not
interactive or dynamic) HTML files that GitHub will put online (host)
for you. It does not do anything else for you. How you generate the HTML
files is up to you. We use a tool called [Quarto](https://quarto.org/)
to generate the HTML files from the more human-friendly
[Markdown](https://quarto.org/docs/authoring/markdown-basics.html) files
to eventually make the Steno Aarhus websites. Read about our reasons for
using Quarto in our [Quarto](quarto.md) page.

Plus, the advantage of using GitHub Pages is that because the HTML files

> are simply copied static files, our websites load extremely quickly and
> can never go down unless GitHub itself goes down. Because they are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are simply copied static files, our websites are quick to load and won't go down unless GitHub itself goes down. Because they are
```

> static files that aren't connected to any database or backend, so there
> are no security risks either. Even if a contributor makes a mistake in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
static files that aren't connected to any database or backend there is no way to access any other Steno areas by exploiting potential weaknesses, making them very secure. Even if a contributor makes a mistake in
```

writing the Markdown files and the Quarto tool can't re-generate the

> updated website without fixing things, the existing website still is up.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
updated website without fixing things, the existing website stays up.
```

It only gets updated when a completed re-generation of the HTML files
happens. If it isn't completed, nothing changes on the website.

So GitHub Pages are a very reliable, secure, fast, and easy way to host
websites.

## Potential consequences

Every decision always has some consequences. For us, the biggest one is
the time commitment needed to learn how to use Git and GitHub. It isn't
an easy tool to learn.

However, because researchers are increasingly using GitHub to do their
work and because more and more courses are teaching Git and GitHub, this
time commitment is both an investment and a necessity anyway. The time
spent learning Git and GitHub for their work and to collaborate with
others can be easily transferred to using GitHub for Steno Aarhus
purposes. Plus, many groups across Steno Aarhus are already using GitHub
and we have workshops to train people on using Git and GitHub, so there
is a lot of support and help available.

## Conclusion

Given these reasons and explanations above, this is why we choose to use
GitHub for various purposes at Steno Diabetes Center Aarhus. It is fast,

> powerful, reliable, secure, and is a tool that researchers are already

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
powerful, reliable, and secure, and it is a tool that researchers are already
```

> or will eventually be using.

Reviewer 2: In line with some of my other feedback: Is this necessarily true? I mean, it's good practice in line with open science, but is it something that *everyone*/*all researchers* will "eventually be using"?

For articles discussing GitHub and research, see
[here](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11828340/),
[here](https://besjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/2041-210X.14108),
[here](https://www.uu.nl/en/research/research-data-management/tools/software-and-computing/github-and-git),
[here](https://peer.asee.org/31594),
[here](https://academic.oup.com/proteincell/article/14/10/713/7147618?login=false),
and
[here](https://academic.oup.com/gigascience/article/doi/10.1093/gigascience/giad113/7516267?login=false)
to name a few. Tools like RStudio for R or Jupyter for Python have
built-in support for Git and excellent integration with GitHub. Many
courses for PhD students also include GitHub, or reference GitHub in
some way, so increasingly, they are being exposed to and using GitHub in
their own work. For example, in the [Reproducible Research in
R](https://r-cubed.rostools.org) workshops taught with the [Danish
Endocrinology and Diabetes Academy](https://ddeacademy.dk/).

As researchers at Steno Diabetes Center Aarhus, we need a platform where
we can share procedures, guidelines, host project websites, and put

> documents that we collaboratively work on. Preferably, we want a tool

Reviewer: ```suggestion
documents that we collaborate on. Preferably, we want a tool
```

that researchers are already using or will likely use in the near
future, and we want a tool that integrates easily into how we already
work. We would rather not have to teach and learn a tool that is only
used in one area (e.g. only to host websites or keep documents), but
rather use a tool that is increasingly part of a researcher's current or
future toolbox.

We also want a tool that is relatively easy to contribute to, even for
those outside of Steno Aarhus (e.g. external collaborators). We want as
little friction as possible between a person wanting to add, change, or
create something on a website and it going online in as little time as
possible. That means, the person wanting to contribute should not need
to coordinate with someone else, wait for someone else to do it, or that

> it take a long time for a change to be approved and put online. We want

Reviewer: takes, rather than take?

[Git](https://git-scm.com/) is a version control system that allows you
to track changes to your files and store them in a "history of changes"
called a repository. It is a powerful tool to use when working alone,
but especially when working with others. It allows you to work on the
same files together, and keep track of who made which changes when. It
is a tool used by millions of people around the world, especially in the
software development community. Software like RStudio and Jupyter or
services like Netflix or Airbnb are all developed with Git, while
companies like Microsoft or Apple or governments like the UK government
use Git to develop their software. You can, however, use Git for more
than just software; you use it to track changes to *any type of* file on
your computer.

[GitHub](https://github.com) is a web-based platform for hosting/storing
Git repositories. It adds extra features on top of Git's file history
tracking, like issue and task tracking, pull requests for collaboration,
project management, and the ability to host files for a website. GitHub
is the [most
popular](https://hutte.io/trails/git-based-development-statistics/) Git

> hosting platform, is it owned by Microsoft, and is used by millions of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
hosting platform, is owned by Microsoft, and is used by millions of
```

While they do internal security work, they also have extensive
[documentation](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/learning-about-github/about-github-advanced-security)
to guide their users on what the user can do to improve security of
their repositories.

And, if something does happen to GitHub, because of the way Git works it
is very easy to move your content to another Git hosting platform.

Some security practices we use for the Steno Aarhus GitHub organization:

-   We follow the principle of least privilege. By default, all members
    can only read other repositories unless they are assigned to a team
    that has write access to a repository or are added directly to a
    repository.
-   All main "branches" in our repositories are protected and can't be
    deleted by anyone aside from the organization owners (in case of an
    emergency). Only a few people are given owner status in the
    organization.

Having said that, no system is truly secure. No organisation or service
can protect against social engineering attacks like phishing or other
attacks that target the user. Users are generally the weakest link in

> the security chain. We can't control that aside from limit access and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the security chain. We can't control that aside from limiting access and
```

in a text editor, you will see HTML code and text. That's because
browsers take the HTML text and visually render it into the nice form we
see on websites.

To host a website means to put those HTML and CSS files on a server in a
way that a browser anywhere in the world can read if given the correct
URL address. That's it. Hosting is simply copying the files to the
server that connects to the internet.

In the case of GitHub Pages, you are giving GitHub a set of static (not
interactive or dynamic) HTML files that GitHub will put online (host)
for you. It does not do anything else for you. How you generate the HTML
files is up to you. We use a tool called [Quarto](https://quarto.org/)
to generate the HTML files from the more human-friendly
[Markdown](https://quarto.org/docs/authoring/markdown-basics.html) files
to make the Steno Aarhus websites. Read about our reasons for using
Quarto on our [Quarto](quarto.md) page.

The advantage of using GitHub Pages for this is that because the HTML
files are simply copied static files, our websites are quick to load and
won't go down unless GitHub itself goes down. Because they are static

> files that aren't connected to any database or backend there is no way
> to access or exploit anything. Which means by default they are secure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
files that aren't connected to any database or backend, there is no way
to access or exploit anything, making them secure by default.
```

Even if a contributor makes a mistake in writing the Markdown files and

> the Quarto tool can't re-generate the updated website, the existing

Reviewer: I would have though that regenerate without a - would be more common in this context, but not sure if there is a subtle difference I'm missing...
